+++
title = 'Advent of Code 2023 in Java'
date = 2024-11-07T07:07:07+01:00
draft = false
+++

<!-- ## Advent of Code 2023 in Java -->

Advent of Code is famous in the developer community around the world for providing a perfect setting for learning a new langugage. After all, we all know that no amount of books and documentation reading can do you a better service than the good ol' coding practice (altough RTFM still holds). As a control freak, I like prepping before a challenge. And by that I mean, I ***LOVE*** prepping. And I go hard on it. I'm aware that it's my academic past speaking in the foolish attempt to control uncontrollable but I often can't help and keeping myself on track to solve a problem sithout side-tracking to investigate all potential rabbit holes along the way can be a challenge in itself. That's why before embarking on a journey with learning Golang by solving AoC 2024 this year, I decided to have a look at the puzzles for last year to know what's coming. And I did it in Java (yes yes don't hate) to build on the flow following from my thesis project[^1].

I came as far as day 10 which crushed me like a bug. After spending 2 days on it I was too frustrated to continue and what remained afterwards was rather cautious anticipation of this year's AoC. I've learnt quite a bit about some features of modern Java (v21). Here's a rather inconsistent log of my impressions along the way:

## Day 2: I love functional Java

Ngl, retrospectively, streaming collections and map/reduce operations are something I now miss in Golang.

## Day 3: dancing around array indices

Tough one. Small input size but I still manage to compute the result in one scan. Part 2: keeping a sliding window of 3 lines with some edge cases for the beginning and the end of the input.

## Day 4: it's all about logging

Ya'll know what I'm talking about about when I mentioned logs in Java. Learning how to use the built-in logger for easier switching between a wall of debug logs and the relevant info-level statements. The decision to avoid using 3rd party logging libs is very intentional: it's ease of setup and use over performance. Rawdogging functional patterns all the way through.

## Day 5: multi-threading and functional interfaces

Large number space. Accumulating computation results leads to the heap memory error. Resorted to a minor optimisation to make comparisons in the end of each iteration to keep only the intermediate result instead of computing the final value given a collection of intermediate values.

Multi-threaded solution results into the reduction of execution time from **40min** to **1min**.

Learnt about Java functional interfaces (aka interfaces with one abstract method) and most importantly lambda expressions to work easily with functional interfaces (a huge bonus: lambda have access to the environment of the outer scope! Which makes it much more concise to quickly implement an interface inline instead of defining a separate class and passing tons of params around)

## Day 7: Java enums

Curious sorting problem that I chose enums to solve with. Interesting observation: the result of comparison among enum fiels is determined by the order of their definition.

Practice using lambdas for implementing a functional interface on the example of a custom [Comparator](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/21/docs/api/java.base/java/util/Comparator.html) for defining sorting rules for an array.
Super hard part 2. Insight: sometimes trying to be smart comes bite you in the ass. Rawdogging boomer loops instead of fancy looking long chains of functional streaming is the way to go.

## Day 8: LCM and hardest shit yet

Boy oh boy if only I knew what was yet to come.

LCM stands for [less common multiplier](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Least_common_multiple). Like I **REALLY** had to think. Brute forcing didn’t work (I had to kill the program after ~10h+ and it still hadn't terminated). Some other solutions led to out of heap memory or stack overflow issues (and by that I do not mean the garbage pile of a certain website). The solution lies not in the problem itself but the input and the data regularities it contains. Only after inspecting the logs could I detect the patterns and cook up a solution (that I later learnt is known as ACM) that cracks the problem in under 1s.

## Day 10: The day I gave up

Pipe maze problem. Part 1 was tough but it's part 2 that took me two days before I could safely pack it in a box and move on. It was one of the problems that is increadibly difficult to debug and instead you have to rely on visualization. Here's what I cooked up in my half-baked attempts:

input text -> loop path -> path + canvas -> just canvas

<video controls autoplay loop muted width="640" height="360">
  <source src="pipe_loop.mp4" type="video/mp4">
  Your browser does not support the video tag.
</video>

{{< video "videos/pipe_loop.md4" "my-5" >}}

[^1]: http://localhost:1313/posts/thesis-learnings-part-1/
